[//]: # (title: HTML-Like languages)

ReSharper supports HTML files, but it also supports HTML-like languages, such as Razor (`.cshtml`) or WebForms (`.aspx`) files. These files contain HTML, but also contain other elements, such as custom tags, or new syntax. Rather than force each language to reimplement HTML parsing, ReSharper provides support that a language can build on, reusing existing and augmenting the existing HTML parsing infrastructure.

For example, a WebForms `.aspx` file can look like this, with custom `<%` and `%>` delimiters marking the ASP.NET specific syntax, and the `asp:` prefixed tags extending the HTML:

```html
<%@ Page Title="Home Page" Langauge="C#" MasterPageFile="~/Site.Master" %>

<asp:Content runat="server" ID="BodyContent" ContentPlaceHolderID="MainContent">
  <h2><%: Title %></h2>

  <div>
    <!-- ... -->
  </div>
</asp:Content>
```

And a Razor `.cshtml` file uses the `@` symbol to delimit C# card that will be executed as the page runs. This C# can even contain HTML blocks.

```html
<h2>@ViewBag.Header</h2>
<table>
@foreach (var person in Model.People) {
    <tr>
       <td><%: person.Name %></td>
       <td><%: person.Country %></td>
    </tr>
}
</table>
```

More languages and language features are also supported. For example, there is also support for the MVC flavour of Razor, which includes `@Model` markup. There is also support for Angular 2+ (including Angular 4) which augments standard HTML files to add tokens for Angular interpolation expressions. And there is also support for parsing HTML and HTML-like languages inside C# and JavaScript string literals.

ReSharper provides the following:

* Language registration - `HtmlLanguageService` to act as a base class for the [PSI Language Service](PsiLanguageDefinition.md).
* [Lexing](HtmlLike_Lexing.md) - `HtmlCompoundLexer` and `HtmlCompoundIncrementalLexer` which interleaves lexing the custom parts of the language with standard HTML.
* Parsing - `IWebTreeBuilder` and the `WebTreeBuilder` base class to parse the mix of custom and traditional HTML syntax. HTML-like languages use custom written parsers rather than parsers generated with `PsiGen` and `.psi` files. This also means that the PSI element types are also generated by hand - the syntax of HTML and its derived languages is small and regular enough that this is possible.
